New live migration strategy doc (#17883)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v23.2/migration-strategy-live-migration.md

- It is better to over-provision your cluster during the migration and then scale it back after the migration is complete than to discover you need more cluster resources during the migration.
- Testing against the live production workload by shadowing traffic from the source database to CockroachDB allows you to properly size your cluster and increases the likelihood that your migration will succeed with minimal problems
- Writes are typically where performance problems arise during live migration. Testing your workload beforehand can help identify areas with slow write performance so they can be fixed before starting the migration.
- After the migration completes, you should factor in time for performance tuning.
- A common way of testing the performance of your workload on CockroachDB is to do gradual testing while the source database is the source of truth, and the CockroachDB cluster's data is replicated from the source database.
- Fallback is typically quite expensive, and it is usually easier to fix any data consistency issues after the cutover to the target database than to fallback to the original source database.

> ## Live migration tooling

Reviewer: Should the LMS be included in this section? I think the main points are: verifying application queries to source; handling cutover to target; verifying application queries on target.

Live migration requires tooling to copy the data from the source database to the target database, and synchronize the data back to the source database after cutover. If you need to import an initial dataset, you can choose to perform the import before the migration, or concurrent with the live migration.

The initial data migration and synchronization can be handled by [third-party migration tools]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/third-party-database-tools.md %}#data-migration-tools).

Many other database systems have built-in change data capture (CDC) services that could be used to stream data to CockroachDB while the source database is the source of truth.

After cutover when CockroachDB is the source of truth, [change data capture]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) allows you to stream data to the source database.

## See also

> 

Reviewer: Worth adding the lift and shift doc here?

- [Migration Overview]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/migration-overview.md %})
- [Use the Schema Conversion Tool](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/migrations-page)
- [Use the Live Migration Service]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/live-migration-service.md %})
- [Migrate with AWS Database Migration Service (DMS)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/aws-dms.md %})

> - [AWS DMS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/dms/latest/userguide/Welcome.html)

Reviewer: Not sure we need this one personally.

---
title: "Migration Strategy: Live Migration"
summary: Learn about the 'Live Migration' data migration strategy
toc: true
docs_area: migrate
---

This topic discusses the *live migration* strategy for [migrating your data to CockroachDB]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/migration-overview.md %}). See [Develop a migration plan]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/migration-overview.md %}#develop-a-migration-plan) for detailed information on deciding which migration strategy will work best for your application.

> During a live migration you maintain two production databases (the *source* and *target* database) for a period of time, and replicate data between them until a final cutover to the target database. The purpose of a live migration is to minimize downtime during this final cutover period and therefore, maintain service continuity.

Reviewer 2: nit (but unsure how it falls here): there's replication but also double writing, which we don't talk about

> A live migration consists of three distinct phases:

Reviewer 3: suggest either "the following distinct phases" and using bullets

OR 

"three phases" and using numbered list so each can be referred to by number

- The initial phase where the source database is the *source of truth*: the database used by the application to read and write data, and the source for replicating the data to the target database.

> - The cutover phase where CockroachDB is the source of truth and the source database is the secondary database.

Reviewer 3: since this step is reversing the flow (AFAICT) of which is which it would be good if we had diagrams for these steps.  feels easy to get confused here with just text 

(if ya don't wanna get too fancy there is ye olde [monodraw](https://monodraw.helftone.com))

> - The final phase where the source database is removed as a replication target and failover database.

Reviewer 3: this would be easier to understand as two sentences, something like

> ... is removed.  That means it is no longer available a replication target, nor a failover database

or something way better than that

There are many possible approaches to performing a live migration. In this topic, we describe two example approaches that have been successful with CockroachDB: consistent cutover, and immediate cutover.

> The consistent cutover approach uses only one database that is writable and consistently readable at the application level, with the data replicated on the back end by another service. When using the consistent cutover approach, one database is the source of truth at any point in time. During the cutover phase, any current application transactions that use the source database are allowed to complete, and the replication service is allowed to catch up. Then new application sessions are allowed to start using the target database, and the replication service replicates data from the target database to the source database. If any problems arise during the cutover phase and you have to revert back to the initial phase, the same process repeats, moving from the target database back to the source database.

Reviewer: "When using the consistent cutover approach, one database is the source of truth at any point in time."

Isn't this the case with both consistent and immediate cutover? We also imply this when defining the "initial phase" above.

Author: Yeah, maybe better to say that only one database is used in the application.

Reviewer 2: there's a nuance here which i think this doc misses, which is you *can* use dual-read/dual-write (aka shadowing) to validate traffic but then swap to a "consistent cutover" when you're ready to swap. but maybe that's outside the scope of cutover / what this doc aims to achieve.

> The consistent cutover approach uses only one database that is writable and consistently readable at the application level, with the data replicated on the back end by another service. When using the consistent cutover approach, one database is the source of truth at any point in time. During the cutover phase, any current application transactions that use the source database are allowed to complete, and the replication service is allowed to catch up. Then new application sessions are allowed to start using the target database, and the replication service replicates data from the target database to the source database. If any problems arise during the cutover phase and you have to revert back to the initial phase, the same process repeats, moving from the target database back to the source database.

Reviewer 3: I would def love a diagram here

Reviewer 3: esp with the moving parts and the conditional logic / loop, could def imagine eyes glazing over and missing stuff here

Reviewer 3: since we recommend this below, may be worth saying in this paragraph that this is the recommended approach

> With the immediate cutover approach, the application performs dual writes to the source and target database during both the initial and cutover phases. This approach can lead to incorrect or inconsistent data between the two databases if there are issues when reading or writing data to one or both of the underlying databases, and may require work after cutover to correct any unacceptable data inconsistencies.

Reviewer: Raising this because the terms "consistent cutover" and "immediate cutover" appear to be derived from the LMS, and should ideally be consistent with what the LMS allows. It seems that with the LMS, it's possible to perform a consistent cutover while using a shadowing method (strict sync) that dual writes to both databases. Conversely, it's also possible to perform an immediate cutover even without dual writing. 

I wonder if we might avoid opening a can of worms by simply differentiating "consistent" and "immediate" cutover in terms of whether you wait for replication to catch up on the target (consistent) or don't (immediate), and not talk about whether there is dual writing. @cotedm @ianjevans thoughts?

Reviewer 2: i +1 this comment. you can do a "consistent cutover" with a "shadowing" approach if you implement an "atomic pause" and validation check (see above). 

really, "consistent cutover" is an atomic pause. there's a number of strategies involved in getting data correct on both sides.

Reviewer 4: Yeah this is a good point. Basically generally describe what a consistent cutover and immediate cutover is in this doc and then in the LMS docs we provide our recommendation on how to do it with our tools. @ianjevans let me know if you need help with getting this to be a bit more generic as @taroface described.

> With the immediate cutover approach, the application performs dual writes to the source and target database during both the initial and cutover phases. This approach can lead to incorrect or inconsistent data between the two databases if there are issues when reading or writing data to one or both of the underlying databases, and may require work after cutover to correct any unacceptable data inconsistencies.

Reviewer 3: this is the other approach right?

I think a diagram would also help here

like an app box with arrows to 2 other boxes (source and target)

Reviewer 3: I know you're about to say this below but it might be worthwhile ending this paragraph with something for the skimmers (aka me) like

> **Cockroach Labs does not recommend the immediate cutover approach with the live migration strategy**

> Cockroach Labs recommends using the consistent cutover approach when using the live migration strategy. Your data remains more consistent and downtime is minimized. However, if zero downtime is truly required, the immediate cutover approach may be used at the risk of some data inconsistencies. Third-party migration tools like AWS DMS, Qlik, and Striim perform the initial migration into CockroachDB, and replicate ongoing changes. CockroachDB changefeeds allow for replication to the source database after cutover, simplifying the service architecture.

Reviewer 3: silly thing but suggest making 'change feeds' a link to our changefeeds docs

> Cockroach Labs recommends using the consistent cutover approach when using the live migration strategy. Your data remains more consistent and downtime is minimized. However, if zero downtime is truly required, the immediate cutover approach may be used at the risk of some data inconsistencies. Third-party migration tools like AWS DMS, Qlik, and Striim perform the initial migration into CockroachDB, and replicate ongoing changes. CockroachDB changefeeds allow for replication to the source database after cutover, simplifying the service architecture.

Reviewer 3: Hah Vale literally prevented me from seeing this comment so I went and made a dupe comment above

## Advantages and disadvantages of the live migration strategy

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
The information on this page assumes you have already reviewed the [migration overview]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/migration-overview.md %}).
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

> When choosing a migration strategy, the fundamental question you should ask is: Do you want to fix problems related to the migration during the migration or afterward? The risks of migrating data are very similar, but the strategy you choose will determine when you will have to take the risk. Choosing the lift-and-shift strategy typically means fixing problems after the migration. Choosing live migration typically means fixing problems during the migration, before the cutover.

Author: I think the nuance is that there are application problems, and there are data consistency problems. Lift-and-shift means fixing both after the migration. Live migration means fixing the application problems during the migration, and potentially dealing with data inconsistency problems after cutover. I'll try to make that clear.

On the spectrum of different data migration strategies, live migration has the following advantages and disadvantages. The terms "lower" and "higher" are not absolute, but relative to other approaches.

Advantages:

- There's greater service availability with live migrations. You can failback to the source database at any point in the migration process, or if there are significant errors after cutover.
- The impact of a migration on users is minimized by having very little downtime.
- There's less internal coordination cost. For example, if other teams use the database, they can update their systems during the initial phase of the migration with no extended outage or maintenance window.

> - You can test the viability and scalability of your architecture on live production data. For example, you can tune the performance of CockroachDB before the cutover without affecting the performance of the production application.

Reviewer 2: you can't do that if you choose a strategy that involves replication. you need to introduce dual reads/writes to fix this.

Disadvantages:

- It is complex to implement. You need the right application design and replication tools to successfully perform the migration.
- It requires abstracting the database operations in the application. You need complete control over all the applications reading and writing to the database to ensure the data is consistent across both the source and target database.

> - During migration there's less certainty about the integrity of the data due to multiple systems being updated.

Author: Basically, yes. E.g. interruptions to the replication service or transaction errors to one database during a dual-write scenario introduce inconsistency between the source and target databases. It doesn't necessarily have to be concurrently, though. If your replication service is run periodically instead of in real-time, for example.

- Fallback is typically quite expensive, and it is usually easier to fix any data consistency issues after the cutover to the target database than to fallback to the original source database.

## Live migration tooling

Live migration requires tooling to copy the data from the source database to the target database, and synchronize the data back to the source database after cutover. If you need to import an initial dataset, you can choose to perform the import before the migration, or concurrent with the live migration.

The initial data migration and synchronization can be handled by tools such as:

- [AWS Database Migration Service]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/aws-dms.md %}) (DMS)
- [Qlik Replicate]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/qlik.md %})
- [Striim({% link {{ page.version.version }}/striim.md %})]

<!-- CRDB migration service -->

Many other database systems have built-in change data capture (CDC) services that could be used to stream data to CockroachDB while the source database is the source of truth.

> After cutover when CockroachDB is the source of truth, [change data capture]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) allows you to stream data to the source database.

Reviewer 3: obvious comment but suggest putting a big list of migration stuff in a 'See also' heading at the bottom of this

With the immediate cutover approach, the application begins writing to the target database with no pause. This approach can lead to incorrect or inconsistent data between the two databases if there were any active application transactions at the time of the cutover, and may require work after cutover to correct any unacceptable data inconsistencies. Cockroach Labs does not recommend the immediate cutover approach with the live migration strategy.

> Cockroach Labs recommends using the consistent cutover approach when using the live migration strategy. Your data remains more consistent and downtime is minimized. However, if zero downtime is truly required, the immediate cutover approach may be used at the risk of some data inconsistencies. Third-party migration tools like [AWS DMS]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/aws-dms.md %}), [Qlik]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/qlik.md %}), and [Striim]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/striim.md %}) perform the initial migration into CockroachDB, and replicate ongoing changes. CockroachDB [changefeeds]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) allow for replication to the source database after cutover, simplifying the service architecture.

Reviewer 4: Probably better to just reference the table of supported tools to avoid future updates https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/third-party-database-tools#data-migration-tools

Author: Done.

## Advantages and disadvantages of the live migration strategy

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
The information on this page assumes you have already reviewed the [migration overview]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/migration-overview.md %}).
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

When choosing a migration strategy, the fundamental consideration is: Do you want to fix problems related to the migration during the migration, or afterward? The risks of migrating data are very similar between migration strategies, but the strategy you choose will determine when you will have to take the risk.

> Choosing the lift-and-shift strategy typically means fixing application and data consistency problems **after** the migration. Choosing live migration typically means fixing application problems **during** the migration, before the cutover, and potentially resolving data inconsistencies after the cutover.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Choosing the lift-and-shift strategy typically means fixing application and data problems **after** the cutover. Choosing live migration typically means fixing application problems **during** the migration, before the cutover, and potentially resolving data inconsistencies after the cutover.
```

On the spectrum of different data migration strategies, live migration has the following advantages and disadvantages. The terms "lower" and "higher" are not absolute, but relative to other approaches.

Advantages:

- There's greater service availability with live migrations. You can failback to the source database at any point in the migration process, or if there are significant errors after cutover.

> - The impact of a migration on users is minimized by having very little downtime.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The impact of a migration on users is minimized by having little to no downtime.
```

Disadvantages:

- It is complex to implement. You need the right application design and replication tools to successfully perform the migration.
- It requires abstracting the database operations in the application. You need complete control over all the applications reading and writing to the database to ensure the data is consistent across both the source and target database.
- During migration there's less certainty about the integrity of the data due to multiple systems being updated.
- Hidden dependencies may reveal themselves after cutover. For example, a microservice that was not accounted for during the migration planning and uses the source database may break after cutover.
- The operational cost of two production systems can be expensive.

## Prepare for a live migration

Before performing a live migration, consider the following:

- It is better to over-provision your cluster during the migration and then scale it back after the migration is complete than to discover you need more cluster resources during the migration.

> - The more testing you do before the migration to properly size your cluster and model the performance of your production workload, the more likely it is that your migration will succeed with minimal problems.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Testing against the live production workload by shadowing traffic from the source database to CockroachDB allows you to properly size your cluster and increases the likelihood that your migration will succeed with minimal problems
```

- Writes are typically where performance problems arise during live migration. Testing your workload beforehand can help identify areas with slow write performance so they can be fixed before starting the migration.
- After the migration completes, you should factor in time for performance tuning.
- A common way of testing the performance of your workload on CockroachDB is to do gradual testing while the source database is the source of truth, and the CockroachDB cluster's data is replicated from the source database.
- Fallback is typically quite expensive, and it is usually easier to fix any data consistency issues after the cutover to the target database than to fallback to the original source database.

## Live migration tooling

Live migration requires tooling to copy the data from the source database to the target database, and synchronize the data back to the source database after cutover. If you need to import an initial dataset, you can choose to perform the import before the migration, or concurrent with the live migration.

> The initial data migration and synchronization can be handled by tools such as:

Reviewer 4: I'd say this is another chance to reference this table https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/third-party-database-tools#data-migration-tools

Author: Done.
